You are listening to radio lab radio lab
from W N Y S C e n n p r
looking to gate in Canadian with electric gate electric gates.
Hey, I'm Jad Abumrad. I'm Robert Krulwich. This is radio lab,
the podcast and today, nice out here.
We're on a road trip in Escondido, California, which is close to San Diego.
Regular suburban neighborhoods, sprinklers, lawns, ice houses.
Pretty ordinary except this might be him.
He gets him for David Hallway now. It going good. How are you?
David is an ecologist and an evolutionary biologist from UC San Diego. Oh yeah,
you can just park. And when we saw him, he was standing in the street.
Oh, he's got the things.
He's got the things holding what look like some kind of Nice hookup pipe.
When we got out of the car,
he walked us over to the side of the road near a driveway and pointed down in
CRG and financing the, the uh, uh, along the curb here.
And there's a little guy here. Yeah, that's, that's a arch in right there.
DRG Antonio.
So I'm just going to click some margin hung out from the side of this, uh,
side of the sidewalk and you are scraping the surface of the dirt with your
fingers. There's a little nastier.
As soon as he scrapes about a hundred ants just appear and start running in
every direction.
That's what we're seeing in just small numbers of workers that were probably in
the leaf. Litter at the surface doesn't seem so small though.
It looks like they're everywhere. This is tiny. This is tiny.
And there's a lot of them. First hundreds,
then thousands of are wrecking up their day looking at you're lucky.
The reason the three of us grown adults are now squatting on this little patch
of dirt in somebody's front lawn is because around 10 years ago,
David and colleagues discovered that this very spot at this particular driveway,
and we're at two to one, one eucalyptus in front of this house.
What's the edge of a vast empire
right about at this driveway. And then empire ends right at that one driveway
to do one eucalyptus to demonstrate this.
David takes this hookah thing of these caring's.
So there's a tube that you suck on that connects to a vial.
He sticks the tube into the scrum, sucks up a few ants,
drops him into the vial. Okay, you just put one at one.
It's that one right there. Okay.
And then he walked just to the other side of the driveway,
like 17 steps sucked up some aunts on that side. A new
here is a new guy, plopped him into the same cup.
So that one right there and waited [inaudible] nobody seems to.
So you've got these answering from different sides of the driveway and the same
cup at first. They don't seem to notice each other. Okay,
so we're watching and I'm watching one guy, one
mm, and then
right away, wow. Two aunts just lunge at each other.
Oh God. They lock in Tena and soon they're in a ball.
This isn't good. That is heavy duty fighting. They're like
rolling around one Scott looks like it's got ahold of the leg and the other
one's got [inaudible]. It's got a Chit Tanner.
It's also listing a couple of legs because it got yanked out your tire.
And one side. Look at that. See, one side of his legs are missing.
He's going around in circles cause he has nowhere else to go.
It's no holds barred.
Now here's the thing.
What we saw in that cut between those two aunts was a tiny version of what is
happening all over the planet. This one family of aunts,
the one on the left of the driveway, not the right, has fought its way,
not only across huge hunks of America,
they now control enormous swaths of the globe and how they pulled this off.
Well, that's maybe more frightening than the fact that they've done it. Yeah.
Now we're going to get to all that,
but first we have to go back to the mid 18 hundreds to a little place in the
north eastern corner of Argentina. That's right.
Have you ever been to this place? Oh yeah. Yeah. We've been there several times,
but yeah, actually on the first, that's Neil Tsutsui.
He's an evolutionary biologist and says, if you're an ant,
this place is kind of special.
Meaning hellish because it's a place where two rivers come together. Yeah.
It's this region in the floodplain between the Rio partner and the Rio,
or why a lot of different kinds of ants live there in this little spot.
And he says, when it rains
[inaudible],
which it does there all the time, the floodwaters rise
everybody's home gets flooded and you have to flee.
The aunts are forced up into the trees or any high ground. That's ecologist,
Mark Moffitt. And then as the waterfalls,
all these different subgroups meet again and they have to start battling from
scratch. That's Milan, Milan, Milan.
They battle relentlessly because this place is always flooding.
And over time, eons of this,
they simply simply do not know how to stop killing each other.
So you've got this breeding ground for incredibly nasty ants there in northern
Argentina. All of these different groups all fighting and fighting,
more or less keeping each other in line. But
one day
in the 18 hundreds as steamship rolls up to say Bueno Saturdays,
which is a big part of the mouth of these two rivers,
a boat pulls up, a ramp comes down. And, uh,
somehow a couple of aunts from one of those Argentine and families are up the
gangplank probably, you know, within the first hour, you know,
cause they're always fleeing floods. So they're, they're programmed to move.
That's what they do. They're moving into coffee bags.
You can imagine they're moving into all kinds of things.
And then the boat pulls out
and this family of aunts leaves their war torn hill hold of the homeland behind
until eventually, oh, sooner or later it was bound to happen. 1890,
as the first time they were seeing there,
they show up in New Orleans
and then, uh, 1907, and they leapfrogged all the way to [inaudible]
cornea cut off on y'all.
They were simultaneously found in San Francisco on Los Angeles, I believe.
How did they get to California? Well, the Panama Canal wasn't open yet,
so it seems likely that they took the train.
Wow.
Now here's the thing about these hands that make them different from all the
other aunts because they grew up in this crazy blood soaked floodplain of death.
Their survival strategy was pretty simple. Kill everything.
If it's not one of us, kill it. No matter what.
Other ants will have occasional sex with other age groups,
capture them and make them into slaves. Adopt their children. These ants,
these ants don't fool around. They don't have sex outside the group.
They never take slaves. And if they catch your babies,
they eat them.
And it turns out there's a side benefit to being a cruel segregationist,
violent bastard. Cause being that way allows these ants to stay
pure
genes stay the same genetically pure, yeah, genetically pure.
But when they stay genetically pure, they can stay unified as a group.
And when they do that, they can spread in ways the other ants just can't
see
ants. You smell like. That's how they know who's in and who's out.
First thing they do when they meet another aunt is they sniff them using their
antenna. Something sort of like a tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, sniff, sniff, sniff,
sniff, sniff.
They they register odor. It's a parallel to nationality in humans.
As long as they sense that identity throughout the individual, say meet,
they're happy.
Hey now with most ants, as they spread over vast distances,
they start to commingle with other as queens come and go,
and inevitably that smell, nationality dilutes. It begins to change.
But with these Argentine ants,
the smell doesn't change from queen the Queen or from nest to nest.
Even if they go way off, conquer totally new territory, build distant nests,
all these different nests function as sort of a fluid network.
They can fuse and vision through time. For example,
you might be nesting on the edge of a sidewalk and the sprinklers come on,
everybody evacuated and all the queens and workers in babies get moved to higher
ground and may fuse with a nest that's already existing at the higher ground.
So all these Argentine ants living across the south in the u s they,
they get along and if you don't have to worry about each other and you've killed
off everything else,
they can focus their energy on producing more Argentine ants
and all you have to do is outnumber the enemy enough and you can wipe out
anything. Even an animal, 5,000 times their size.
Foreign Lizards are dropping and abundance out in California because the aunts
simply run all over them and they can never sleep.
These lizards normally eat ants,
but they simply can't grab these answer too fast and too small and
so they're literally being killed by their own food, does sum up,
they are very nasty, very loyal and they're extraordinarily numerous.
Put those three things together and what you get is gangas con and an ant
c Ah, USA in your shadow. Bye
during the 1950s this tight knit brutal family of and starts to spread deeper
into California.
Thanks in large part to all the new freeways because now that gets spread faster
and farther. Like say you put out a potted plant on your front porch,
the ants move in overnight. Next Day, pick up that plant and move it,
you know, a hundred miles away.
The next day there they are in this new place that's so far away from where they
were yesterday and they can conquer that. And not only that,
it is after all the 1950s and 1960s and you've got suburbs springing up all over
America, lots of lawns, lots of springs
[inaudible] go on off, on, off, on off.
Which if you're an aunt is in many ways very similar to home fresh terrain
that's been exposed by the reseeding floodwaters.
Humans have modified the habitat in California in ways that Argentine ants
really like.
So the Argentine answer happy,
and most people don't even notice this is happening until we get to the 1990s in
fact, in 1998 Neil, our entomologist friend and his colleague Andy Suarez,
they're now studying Argentine ans around San Diego and they begin to wonder how
far can a family like this have ants spread and still remain pure and still
remain loyal to each other. So in the summer of that year,
Neil and Andy hop into a car and they go on a little road trip
starting in San Diego and hitting more.
They took a cup full of Argentine ants from San Diego and periodically they
would stop, get out of the car,
kneel down with their aunt hookah pipes and suck up local aunts,
whoever happened to be there and then pop those hands into the cup with the San
Diego. And now if the ants think they're part of the same colony,
they won't fight. That's right. So we put an answer from Los Angeles, tap, tap,
tap, sniff, sniff, sniff.
And they recognize San Diego ants as being members of the same colony.
So they know the colony extends, or at least from San Diego to Los Angeles,
but they keep going. If you go up to Santa Barbara, no aggression, snip, snip,
snip, nothing, no fighting to San Louis Obispo, tap, tap, tap. That same thing,
snip, snip, snip, snip. They think they're all members of the same colony.
Still no fight up to San Francisco. Tap, tap, tap. The same things. Sniff,
sniff, sniff. And this continued all the way to a little town,
a hundred miles north of San Francisco,
and that site displayed no aggression towards the ants that we collected at the
very beginning of our road trip from over 600 miles away in San Diego.
Just think about that for a second. Okay.
Remember those anthills you might've had in your front lawn,
you had a little little mounds.
Imagine one of those 600 miles wide,
give or take with trillions and trillions of ants in it.
Scientists call this the super colony,
the large California super colony and scientists kept tracking this colony.
They realized these ants had hitchhiked far beyond California.
They're all over Europe. Europe's got actually,
you're just got the largest quality known. That's Australian and scientist,
Melissa Thomas. Yes. In 2002,
she worked with David Hallway to check just how far this one super colony has
expanded. Uh, Australia has some where you are. We've got some here in Perth.
Yes. And um, over in um, Melbourne and Sydney area,
up and down Spain, all around Italy,
around Greece, Pan many Atlantic and Pacific islands, Hawaii, Easter island,
places like that. They've taken over much of northern New Zealand.
They've taken over parts of South Africa.
All these places are occupied by the same family of the other, the same colony.
They think they're all members of the same colony. In fact,
we imported Argentenians from Japan, Hawaii, Australia, New Zealand,
Europe brought them to UC Berkeley and they put all of these aunts from all
these different places in the same cup like we did on our road trip, tap, tap,
tap, tap, tap, sniff, sniff, sniff, sniff and no fighting.
[inaudible]
you've got say an ad from Okinawa in Japan and an aunt from Genoa in Italy.
There's 6,000 miles distance, maybe 150 generations apart.
And yet they still know each other.
[inaudible]
they still recognize each other as members of the same colony because the smell
that bonds them together hasn't changed. At some point in the past,
you know,
one colony in Argentina got picked up and moved around and spread and continue
to spread and continue to spread the descendants of those aunts we have now
across all continents except Antarctica.
They still think they're all members of the same family.
So here you've got this monoculture, right?
[inaudible] that's really violent on the edges. Yeah.
But then if you're on the inside and part of the group, very, very peaceful.
And since there's only one other creature that can do this,
I can create an allegiance across vast, vast spreads of earth.
I couldn't help it ask Neil, do you ever, do you ever analogized to,
to human history when you will look at these things? It's tempting to, but uh,
I try not to because it, you know,
these sorts of situations are kind of a roar shark.
You can see whatever you want to. And then, yeah. And so, you know,
for our Argentine, at research, we've had people say, look,
the lesson from this is that we should all be like Argentine ants and get along
and cooperate and we'll succeed. But then on the other hand, I've had, you know,
white supremacist websites cite my research and say, you know,
this is evidence that they're, the key to success is not mixing the races.
The, the unsettling part is that the, at least in efficacy like there, right.
This has, this has been a very successful formula for these ants.
Well, if it lasts, right.
Which brings us to a chill, what's your whole big name? Jill Shanahan.
Jill Shack. In 1995 Jill was working with Andy Suarez in San helping him
map the ant empire. And one day as part of her job,
she found herself in park and housing complex just outside San Diego looking for
Argentine ants. So do you find them? Yeah, I believe that they had,
there was a colony at the base of a tree. No. Before she left,
she grabbed some Argentine ants from the lab and these tree aunts,
they looked exactly the same as her lab and they're pretty easy to identify and
she figured they would just meet the new ants and go sniff, sniff, get along,
or ignore each other.
But when she plopped one of these trees into the cup with one of her lab bands,
these guys were fighting,
one was more aggressive than the other and start biting the other one and then
they rappel each other and get to get into a tight little ball and just,
and you're watching this and no one has ever seen Argentenians fake before.
You're seeing something nobody's seen before.
Did you have any sense that that was happening? No. I guess not.
Which may explain why Jill is now in the interior design field,
but this is a big deal because what it means is that another family of Argentine
ants had made it over from the old country
in Brazil,
that old fight to America I was going to spent a lot of time at.
So scientists like Melissa began to wonder how big is this new empire?
Interesting. And where do the two meet exactly.
I'll go is to find where that territory met in nature.
So Melissa heads out with her standard ant gear.
The hookah pipe thing does suck up the ants, the fight cup to plop them into,
right. She'd do the Fight Cup test in all these different places in the area,
trying to zero in on where that border might be slightly sort of get closer and
closer and closer and eventually she finds herself walking down a street and a
normal subdivision in Escondido. She looks down
and she sees it. This thick channel of death,
dead bodies, hundreds, hundreds of thousands,
hundreds of thousands of dead bodies and from all directions.
Live ants were pouring into this area and fighting to the death
[inaudible]
masses and masses of them fighting piles and piles of them killing each other.
It's pretty extraordinary to see. Actually,
there were times when we didn't even need to get out of the car to find the
super colony boundary because you'd see the dead workers spilling over the curb,
spilling drinks us back to where we started that driveway and David Halloway.
Oh my God. They're just like almost bouncing off the bottom.
This then is the price of empire.
These aunts have conquered a huge portion of the globe. Oh.
But every day they pay the price in bodies at the border.
Like this guy has lost all that. You see, he's only,
he's only got limbs on one side now and that price might be going up.
The scientists have now figured out that several more families of Argentine ants
have hitchhiked their way over. Yeah. This is that. This is what I expect.
They gonna die or they'll pro, yeah,
the ones that are really injured probably won't live too much longer. Oh my God.
Those two, when you show in the end,
this strategy of violence and intolerance seems to be pretty good until it meets
itself.
[inaudible]
or even worse, something bad or oh my God, this too.
When you shut the Ho, I think Godfrey opened the other one up.
He just went into another fight. Oh look, they're going into a circle. Oh,
they're in the ball of death. Well, not quite.
They've just sort of locked, locked the will become the ball. Big things too.
Douglas Smith for production help on this piece. Douglas. I'm Jad Abumrad.
I'm Robert Krulwich. Thanks for listening.